---
layout: aboutpages
title: About the event and its socio-political background
permalink: /about-politics/
---
<h1>The Political Background</h1>
<div class="information">
<h2>The interwar period</h2>
<p>Since the end of WW1 in 1918, Austria and its population were struggling to live in this new country, much smaller than the former Austro-Hungarian empire. Initially, the newly founded Republik of <a href="#" class="translation" data-toggle="tooltip" title="German-Austria">Deutsch-Österreich</a>, intended to become part of Germany. However, the treaty of St Germain prevented this and Austria became the <a href="#" class="translation" data-toggle="tooltip" title="Republic of Austria">Republik Österreich</a>, a country struggling with post-war trauma, financial, economic and social difficulties. The Republik Österreich existed as a democratic nation until 1934, when Engelbert Dollfuß became dictator and <a href="#" class="link-info" data-toggle="tooltip" title="Austrofascism is an autoritarian, fascist, and corporatist regime that advocates Austrian nationalism, independence from Germany and Catholicism.">Austrofascism</a> dominated politics.</p>
<p>During the interwar-period, two major parties dominated Austrian politics: Christian-Socialists who ruled parliament, and Social-Democrats who were in opposition. The Social Democratic Party lost power in the 1920s but retained their power in the capital city, Vienna and <a href="#" class="link-info" data-toggle="tooltip" title="Steyr (Upper Austria), Linz (Upper Austria), Mürzzuschlag (Styria), etc.">industrial centres</a> around the country. During the interwar period, their strong focus on social reform and the elevation of the precarious situation of the working class led to <a href="#" class="link-info" data-toggle="tooltip" title="Following their reforms, workers gained more rights in the work place like sick leave, holiday benefits, childcare benefits, and the 8-hour working day.">very positive social developments</a>. These benefits did apply to workers not only in Vienna, but also in other industrial centres like the areas around Linz and Steyr in Upper Austria, parts of Lower Austria, and North-Eastern Styria, where Mürzzuschlag, the venue of the 2nd Workers Winter Olympics, is situated.</p>
<h2>The Linzer Programm</h2>
<p>The so-called <a href="#" class="link-info" data-toggle="tooltip" title="Linz is a town in Upper Austria">Linzer</a> Programm was the key document which would define the key policies of the Social Democratic party and their clubs from its inception in 1926 to the <a href="#" class="link-info" data-toggle="tooltip" title="Dollfuß prohibited all parties when he came to power.">prohibition of the party in 1934</a>. The programme clearly acknowledges Marxism and <a href="#" class="link-info" data-toggle="tooltip" title="The working class was supressed by the upper class">class struggle</a> as well as the necessity that socialism is a stepping stone for society to move from capitalism to communism. While it acknowledges the <a href="#" class="link-info" data-toggle="tooltip" title="Another name for the Republik of Austria between 1919 and 1934">First Republic's</a> achievements to date, such as suffrages and social welfare, its militant tone was interpreted as proclamation of class war by political opponents. It proved disastrous for the Social Democratic Party’s standing and groups like the <a href="#" class="link-info" data-toggle="tooltip" title="The Heimwehr was the Christian Socialist Party’s paramilitary wing">Heimwehr</a> profited from gaining new members as a consequence.</p></div>
<div class="information">
<h1 class="category-title"> Class struggle </h1>
<p>The class struggle was seen as an essential aspect of Social Democratic politics. It was not only about elevating the working class but ending oppression, fighting capitalism and an ideology of social change that would end the exploitation of the working class. Eventually, politics should benefit the many, not the few, and everyone should work together to improve life for everybody.</p>
    <section class="vh-30" style="background-color: #eee;">
      <div class="container py-sm-5 h-40">
        <div class="row d-flex align-items-center h-20">
          <div class="col col-md-12 mb-3 mb-md-1" id="style3">
            <figure class="bg-white p-3 rounded" style="border-left: .25rem solid #a34e78;">
              <blockquote class="blockquote pb-2">
                <p class="inlinequote">Dieser Klassenkampf ist nicht nur ein Kampf zwischen entgegengesetzten Klasseninteressen, sondern zugleich ein Kampf zwischen entgegengesetzten Klassenidealen. Der Kampf zwischen Kapital und Arbeit, es ist der Kampf zwischen dem Bann der Tradition und dem Streben der Volksmassen nach Umwälzung des gesellschaftlichen, kulturellen und staatlichen Lebens; es ist der Kampf zwischen der Herrschaft der Autorität und dem Streben der Volksmassen nach Freiheit und Selbstbestimmung;<a href="#" class="translation" data-toggle="tooltip" title="This class struggle is not only a struggle between opposing class interests, but at the same time a struggle between opposing class ideals. The struggle between capital and labour, it is the struggle between the spell of tradition and the striving of the popular masses for the transformation of social, cultural and state life; it is the struggle between the rule of authority and the aspiration of the popular masses for freedom and self-determination; it is the struggle between the class, which bases its rule on the oppression and exploitation of the masses of the people, and the class which, fighting its own oppression and exploitation, fights all oppression and exploitation, whether directed against a class or a gender, a nation or a race"> Translation </a></p><p>...es ist der Kampf zwischen der Klasse, die ihre Herrschaft auf die Unterdrückung und Ausbeutung der Volksmassen gründet, und der Klasse, die, ihre eigene Unterdrückung und Ausbeutung bekämpfend, jede Unterdrückung und Ausbeutung bekämpft, sei sie gerichtet gegen eine Klasse oder ein Geschlecht, eine Nation oder eine Rasse; es ist der Kampf zwischen einer Gesellschaftsordnung, die die Volksgesundheit und das Menschenglück dem Profitstreben opfert, und einer Gesellschaftsordnung, die die Volkswirtschaft zum dienenden Mittel der Volksgesundheit und des Menschenglücks verwandelt; es ist der Kampf zwischen einer Gesellschaftsordnung, die die Kultur der wenigen auf die Kulturlosigkeit ausgebeuteter Massen gründet, und einer Gesellschaftsordnung, die das Kulturerbe dem ganzen Volke zueignet, das ganze Volk zu einer Kulturgemeinschaft verknüpft; es ist der Kampf zwischen einer Gesellschaftsordnung, die die geistige wie die manuelle Arbeit dienstbar macht dem Kapital, und einer Gesellschaftsordnung, die die manuelle wie die geistige Arbeit erhebt zum Dienste an der Volksgesamtheit."<a href="#" class="translation" data-toggle="tooltip" title="...it is the struggle between the class, which bases its rule on the oppression and exploitation of the masses of the people, and the class which, fighting its own oppression and exploitation, fights all oppression and exploitation, whether directed against a class or a gender, a nation or a race; it is the struggle between a social order that sacrifices public health and happiness for profit and a social order that transforms the national economy into the servant means of public health and human happiness; it is the struggle between a social order that bases the culture of the few masses exploited on the lack of culture and a social order that appropriates cultural heritage to the whole people, links the whole people into a cultural community; it is the struggle between a social order that makes intellectual and manual labor sub service to capital, and a social order that elevates manual and spiritual labor to serve the people's population.">Translation</a></p>
              </blockquote>
              <figcaption class="blockquote-footer mb-0 font-italic">
                <span class="source">Linzer Programm</span>, 1926
              </figcaption>
            </figure>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </section>
<!-- The following includes links to the articles in the respective category from each pathway-->
<div class="abstract-listing">{% include class-struggle-collection.html %}</div>
<div class="information">
<h1 class="category-title"> Education </h1>
<p>Educating the working class was an essential goal of Social Democratic Politics and the working class clubs that supported their ideology. Once workers were allowed to found their own clubs at the turn of the 20th century, many people dedicated their little free time to the club. They engaged in political debate, reading clubs but also sports like cycling, football or winter sports. Clubs focused also on engaging the younger generation to ensure mental and physical fitness as well as a strong sense of community in which the Social Democratic ideals could be passed on.</p>
    <section class="vh-30" style="background-color: #eee;">
      <div class="container py-sm-5 h-40">
        <div class="row d-flex align-items-center h-20">
          <div class="col col-md-12 mb-3 mb-md-1" id="style3">
            <figure class="bg-white p-3 rounded" style="border-left: .25rem solid #a34e78;">
              <blockquote class="blockquote pb-2">
                <p class="inlinequote"><span data-toggle="tooltip" title="Social democracy establishes and promotes educational organizations that strive for a spiritual and physical education of the youth filled with a socialist spirit. She fights drunkenness and drinking habits. It promotes workers' sport. It organises the workers' education system and promotes the expansion of popular education and the cultivation of art. It supports all the efforts of the most advanced layers of the working class to appropriate the achievements of science and art and to merge them with the cultural elements gradually developing from the living conditions of the working class itself, filled with the spirit of its liberation struggle, into the germ cells of the becoming proletarian socialist culture.">“Die Sozialdemokratie</span> begründet und fördert <span class="emphasis">Erziehungsorganisationen</span>, die eine von sozialistischem Geiste erfüllte geistige und körperliche Erziehung der Jugend anstreben. Sie bekämpft die <span class="emphasis">Trunksucht</span> und die Trinksitten. Sie fördert den <span class="emphasis">Arbeitersport</span>. Sie organisiert das <span class="emphasis">Arbeiterbildungswesen</span> und fördert den Ausbau des <span class="emphasis">Volksbildungswesens</span> und der volkstümlichen Kunstpflege. Sie unterstützt alle Anstrengungen der vorgeschrittensten Schichten der Arbeiterklasse, sich die Errungenschaften der Wissenschaft und der Kunst anzueignen und sie mit den sich allmählich aus den Lebensbedingungen der Arbeiterklasse selbst entwickelnden vom Geiste ihres Befreiungskampfes erfüllten Kulturelementen zu Keimzellen der werdenden proletarisch-sozialistischen Kultur zu verschmelzen.“</p>
              </blockquote>
              <figcaption class="blockquote-footer mb-0 font-italic">
                <span class="source">Linzer Programm</span>, 1926
              </figcaption>
            </figure>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </section>
<!-- The following includes links to the articles in the respective category from each pathway-->
<div class="abstract-listing">{% include education-collection.html %}</div>
<div class="information">
<h1 class="category-title"> Equality </h1>
<p>The Linzer Programm includes a dedicated paragraph on the so-called women’s question. “Die Sozialdemokratie bekämpft die Vorurteile, die sich der Gleichberechtigung der Frauen entgegenstellen. Sie fordert auch für die Frauen volle Möglichkeit der Entfaltung der Persönlichkeit“ (Linzer Programm 4, p. 391). Women should not only be treated equally, but also have the same changes to develop their talents.  In addition, women should not be overwhelmed by their dual burden of handling childcare and having a job which could potentially harm their health. Instead, their caring duties should be valued and supported by community facilities like childcare facilities. Furthermore, they should be able to take on any job they like, for equal pay as men.</p>
<p>This progressive viewpoint of women is reflected in the encouragement of women to take part in mass sport events as well as the social democratic educational programmes. Women compete in three competitions, namely figure skating, pair figure skating and cross-country skiing. For comparison, women had been admitted in the Olympic games no earlier than the 1928 games in St Moritz and Amsterdam <span class="emphasis">(https://www.olympedia.org/editions/10)</span>. <a href="#" class="link-info" data-toggle="tooltip" title="founder of the modern Olympic Games">Pierre de Coubertin</a> was initially against having women compete in the games <span class="emphasis">(IOC, Pierre de Coubertin, 2021)</span>. The temporally closest event to the 1931 Winter Olympiad, St Moritz in 1928 and the Lake Placid Olympic games in 1932, saw women only compete in single and <a href="#" class="link-info" data-toggle="tooltip" title="Women’s speed skating was demonstrated in St Moritz but it would not become part of the official competition until 1960">pair figure skating</a>, with an overall lower turnout than at the much smaller event in Mürzzuschlag.</p>
<!-- The following includes links to the articles in the respective category from each pathway-->
<div class="abstract-listing">{% include equality-collection.html %}</div>
<div class="information">
<h1 class="category-title"> International </h1>
<p>The Linzer Programm and the social democrats pledged an active cooperation with international worker groups. Thus, in preparation and during the Winter and the Summer Olympiad, working closely with international partners was a priority and co-operations were foster between Austrian groups and party affiliates abroad. In addition, various measures were taken to support national and international travel: additional trains during the time of the event were added as well as reduced ticket prices. This way, many more people were able to partake. However, as Stefanie Zotter notes in her 1996 dissertation, this was quite surprising, because the national rail service management were considered hostile towards the working class; for example, it was not allowed to decorate the train station in Mürzzuschlag, in case that anyone would accidentally become aware of the Olympiad while their train went past the station <span class="emphasis">(Zotter 1996, 44)</span>.</p></div>
<!-- The following includes links to the articles in the respective category from each pathway-->
<div class="abstract-listing">{% include international-collection.html %}</div>
<div class="information">
<h1 class="category-title"> Solidarity </h1>
<p>There was a strong sense of community and solidarity that pervaded Social Democratic Politics. Supporting workers from different trades and implementing social change for everybody is part of the essential notion that the power of capitalism and those who benefit from exploiting the working class must be diminished. The Linzer Programm did not only support the working class but also <a href="#" class="link-info" data-toggle="tooltip" title="The social democrats believed that only joint forces could reduce the bourgeoise' power">small business tradesmen or smallholders</a> who depended on the the benevolence of larger rivalling businesses and were often struggling to sustain a reasonable living standard. Particularly after WW1 and consquent debts and the financial crisis of the 1920s, communal support was key to survival.</p></div>
<div class="abstract-listing">{% include solidarity-collection.html %}</div>